[[reusable-pdf]]
== Reusable PDF

[[reusable-pdf-general]]
=== General

In PDF, reuse of, and access to, content is provided by the structures of the
file and the software consuming the file. The content of a file is considered
reusable if its real content, as specified in ISO 32000-2:2020, 14.8.2.2, is
represented with text or has a text-based equivalent presented in logical
reading order with appropriate semantics. This document establishes how to apply
these principles to a PDF file; it addresses the way content is encoded within a
conforming file but does not regulate that file's content, as seen in the
following examples.

[example]
The maximum number of characters in a line of text is unregulated.

[example]
Specific colours, colour-combinations, or contrast ratios are unregulated.

[example]
The choice to use plain language or other language is unregulated.

[example]
The size of fonts is unregulated.

=== Using other specifications and standards

==== General

Requirements pertaining to content (e.g. the examples provided in
<<reusable-pdf-general>>) are commonly addressed through other specifications
and standards. <<reusable-pdf-declarations>> describes a means of claiming
conformity with one or more such specifications or standards.

[[reusable-pdf-declarations]]
==== Declarations

A file conforming with the requirements of this document may declare conformance with any
other specification or standard by using the PDF Declarations mechanism.

[example]
====
A PDF Declaration can serve as the author's statement attesting that:

* all of the file's content conforms to a specific accessibility standard (such
as WCAG 2.2, Level AA);[5]

* all images and figures have been checked for appropriate alternate
descriptions;

* the file has been certified reusable when using specific software;

* the file has been validated by a remediator.
====

NOTE: A detailed example of a PDF Declaration and its syntax is provided in
<<annex-a>>.

Files in conformity with this document may leverage the PDF Declarations
mechanism to include claims pertaining to the entire file, to portions of the
file (even specific objects), or both.

[example]
A PDF Declaration can serve as the author's statement attesting that an
individual movie embedded in a file conforms to WCAG 2.2 Level AA.[5]

NOTE: It is expected that the file, portion, or object to which a PDF
Declaration applies fully conforms to the specification or standards to which
they are declaring conformity.

NOTE: The PDF Association's list of PDF Declarations is fully extensible. Other
PDF Declarations can be defined there and elsewhere.

*[Conformance level for accessibility]* â€” An embedded file that is not a PDF
file, if necessary to the understanding of the document, shall have an
associated PDF Declaration in accordance with PDF Declarations, indicating its
conformance to an appropriate accessibility standard. The PDF Declaration, as
specified in PDF Declarations, shall be included through the *Metadata* entry in
the embedded file's file specification dictionary.

==== ISO PDF subset standards

A file in conformity with this document may also conform to ISO standards based
on <<ISO_32000-2>> (PDF 2.0) including, but not limited to, <<ISO_14289-2>>
(PDF/UA-2), <<ISO_19005-4>> (PDF/A-4) and <<ISO_15930-9>> (PDF/X-6).
